[Music]
the horizon
it's like an infinity you can move
towards it
further away from wherever you begin but
you'll never get there
it's unobtainable you can aim for it
like the sky indeed the sky is even
better you can
aim for it never get there and yet get
right past it
what you thought was there is revealed
not to be and what happens
is the sky opens up to something even
deeper and
more mysterious infinity is something
you can approach
you can know about it but you will just
never get to it
there is a way to move towards it or
away from it
you are always at the beginning of
infinity and in all directions
back to the horizon and the ocean
the ocean is vast but it's a poor
metaphor
even the sky is a poor metaphor but i'm
here because well
this place is both a metaphor and the
actual real thing
this place has the ominous name in
sydney australia of
the gap the history of the gap is
not particularly optimistic it's
infamous for reasons the viewer may
guess
or can research themselves i'm
interested in this place because it is
right in the middle between over there
civilization
and over there nothingness
in a sense this is a beginning of
infinity
we can see where we've started and out
there
hostility
[Music]
a roiling ocean that we've managed to
eke out in existence in the midst of
civilization making its first inroads
into infinity
[Music]
yet here we are always in the gap
between
pushing into the frontiers not just
physically of course
but in a sense the precondition for that
pushing into the
abstract space of knowledge creation of
explaining the rest and so
coming to control it all let's begin
[Music]
hello i'm going to try a little
experiment today i'm going to start uh
reading through parts of the beginning
of infinity just the first chapter
i have seen at least one other aussie
doing this with a
different series of books
i don't know if it'll be useful i
thought i'd try it just as an experiment
sort of thinking out loud i guess and
just commenting on some of my favorite
parts
of the book um by doing so it kind of
clarifies my own thoughts about things
that's one thing uh the other thing
there is a sense in the
critical rationalist community that
there's a
lot of bad ideas out there or false
ideas
that get a lot of traction in an
undeserved kind of way
while the ideas of popper and deutsch
for example
don't and so this might go
some way to addressing that
well there we are that's where i began
i wasn't sure where i was going with all
this but i sort of knew the point back
then
as i said it was basically to help me
understand the book
a little bit better by thinking out loud
and clarifying my own ideas about things
and the other thing was to speak about
the bad ideas that are
out there by way of critique competing
ideas
really are critiques of one another but
in many cases
one idea really is a valid critique of
another idea
and refutes the other idea the world is
flooded in pessimism right now it is
drowning in misconceptions about how
knowledge is created
it's saturated by a desire apparently
for stagnation
a kind of precautionary principle when
it comes to progress
we by which i mean western civilization
saying nothing about cultures that are
more primitive still
are trapped by really bad ideas
irrational memes and anti-rational memes
and this book the beginning of infinity
is the best antidote
i know of sure there are other works out
there about progress and optimism books
that focus on one aspect or another of
this
grand vision but none of them like the
beginning of infinity
actually unite all the crucial aspects
of this one worldview into one
synthesized
whole because it's only in uniting these
ideas
that you really come to appreciate the
cosmic significance of
people or at least the potential cosmic
significance of
us in particular but few take that
seriously
it's sadly almost a joke to some people
i was frustrated recently listening to
sam
harris and ricky gervais speaking
they've got a podcast
out this year 2021
called absolutely mental and it's
entertaining in parts it's it's funny of
course ricky is a great comedian but
in terms of philosophy and he is trained
in philosophy as sam
is he is a standard
vanilla style pessimist and
anti-human he wouldn't think that he
would think that he's a great humanist
but in fact he denigrates people as
being the cause of just so many problems
in in the style of david attenborough in
the style of so many public
intellectuals
that we are the poison and there needs
to be some cure
to prevent our spreading across the
globe
much less the rest of the cosmos
now happily during this podcast with sam
harris sam did
go some way to explaining some parts
of david deutch's worldview and invoked
the name of david deutsch and one would
hope that ricky would go
and research some of these ideas perhaps
read the beginning of infinity
but i doubt it because ricky dismissed
what sam said uh treated this this grand
vision of knowledge and people and their
cosmic significance
as merely of academic abstract interests
he brushed it aside because it seemed to
him i guess in his own mind as it does
to many people
like science fiction rather than actual
science
it seems too good to be true or
even worse than that too bad to be true
that in some moods of course people such
as
ricky gervais such as your standard
public intellectual
think that people gaining control
of the planet the solar system the
cosmos
is something like a nightmare because
these people have already been convinced
are convinced that we've ruined the
planet
that we are like some kind of virus
and that the only cure to this is to
somehow eradicate us from the face of
the earth if not that
than to severely diminish our power to
survive
on this planet of course that's not the
way they would see it but they do
and a large part of ricky and sam's
podcast was about how we are
just on the continuum of all other
animals that live
on this planet that we are nothing
special
and that even ricky gervais explicitly
said
we're just like an ape using a tool but
just a little bit better
we're just the next step along that
smooth continuum
and sam did try to mention that this was
misconceived but
still i'm not sure that sam quite
understands
what this position of ours actually is
and i suppose to some extent why should
he
why should anyone the culture is
absolutely saturated as i said from a
decades-long
campaign against people
against our significance and the reason
for that
comes from things like environmentalism
yes that we are the cause of the ills of
the world
but also it's a reaction against
superstitious religion
which in many ways it's been right for
people
to criticize and to reject the
bad parts of religion but in doing so
they've thrown out the baby with the
bath water there was a lot of baby in
that bath water
i know that sam thinks there's not but
there really is
and importantly a very important and
crucial part
of many of the big religions of the
world
is placing people at the center
of the cosmos in a sense certainly at
the center
morally and and sam might say you know
the moral landscape is a book that he
wrote about
the significance of consciousness for
morality
but the problem is he doesn't put people
there at the center
of morality the concerns of people
rather than
all conscious creatures as if all
conscious creatures
have a claim to moral status to the
extent that they're conscious
and i think this is wrong and i think
this is wrong because
the kind of consciousness we have at
least
one aspect of the consciousness that we
have an aspect of consciousness this
mystery of whatever
whatever whatever it means to be a
person one aspect of this mystery is
our capacity to create explanations and
for reasons beyond the scope of this
episode because i've talked about it so
much
i think that is the crucial feature
of our existence that means
we are categorically different in moral
terms compared to
any other conscious creature and so even
sam who tries to salvage something
from the religious morality which is
that people are important and they're
not just another physical system
but they actually have consciousness or
creativity the capacity to
understand the universe in which they
find themselves
sam lumps them in just as ricky does
just as every public intellectual
almost today does alongside all other
animals
and that we're nothing ultimately
special in the cosmic scheme of things
the beginning of infinity is a different
worldview it is a reaction against
this kind of thinking so i think it
is sad something has been lost
with the rejection of religion by public
intellectuals
because there are many important things
to salvage there
and i'll come to some of those later but
importantly
the for want of a better word sacredness
of humanity the sacredness of the
individual human life
and this is not about religious thinking
it's not about starting a different kind
of religion
because there's nothing here that one
needs to believe
honestly there's nothing here that you
need to believe
as actually finally once and for all
true
there are no dogmas or doctrines what
there are
are fallible explanations and that
itself is not a belief either
any of this can be overturned criticized
reinterpreted by you
in a way that suits you that works for
you
that solves your problem allows you to
move forward and make progress and
hopefully everyone else to make progress
as well
to come to a consensus in order to
resolve conflicts
but not to adhere to the text in some
way
as religious people would and as people
who are against religion do exactly the
same thing adhere to the text and say
well that's wrong because of precisely
the way it's been written
or we must believe it because of the
precise of the way it's been written
and this is a shame even within
religious communities which we have to
admit
the overwhelming majority of people are
still religious
to a greater or lesser extent and even
many people in the west who ostensibly
call themselves religious are
losing losing their faith in the
sacredness of
the specialness of human life that they
regard
not only other creatures on the planet
as of equal moral status
but of the inert planet itself as of
equal moral status
that we need to sacrifice ourselves for
the planet
this is not something that comes out of
traditional religion but they'll try and
tell you it does now
we have things in christianity i know
because my background is christian
christian i've worked in christian
institutions catholic institutions
they have things like eco theology now
eco theology the way in which we need to
basically worship mother earth
this is to some extent mainstream
catholic teaching
so they're off the rails to a large
extent
a traditional religion is losing its way
insofar as it had a good way at all to
begin with
the the things that were redeemable
about it
are being lost diluted by even
worse ideas there is a rank order of bad
ideas
some are worse than others and
traditional religious ideas bad as they
are
are possibly superior to the new
religion
to the new religions of politics
environmentalism anti-humanism at least
traditional religions
regarded people as being of
prime importance of central importance
and that's what
civilization was about trying to protect
people and trying to
enable people to get along so they can
continue to solve their problems off
into the infinite future
and that things would get better as well
that things would get better
now we don't think people are
spiritually divine
we don't endorse souls and mysticism
but the alternative is not to think that
people are not special because we
are just not in a mystical
supernatural way we're special
we're not on a continuum with other
animals this is the point
i keep returning to and it's a point i
keep returning to because i think
people need to hear it because of all
the messages in the beginning of
infinity
the one that i think can do the most
work
in pushing back against the
current moral zeitgeist is pessimism
about people if you recognize
that people are different and special
not in precisely the
same way that traditional religions have
said
but special nevertheless then you will
do what it takes
in order to construct your world view
construct your knowledge construct your
approach to life
in order to not only allow people to
continue to survive
but to flourish to flourish and make
progress
faster than ever to create wealth more
than we've had before
to aim for these things as a
kind of good in and of itself so all of
this has been motivation for
this podcast as i entered this this
final episode
the book has certainly shaped my mind
books
can do this and i know it's a lot of
other people have
experienced the same shift in world view
or a similar shift in world view
discussing books talking about books can
do this even more deeply as i've said
before
with me the first time this really
properly happened
was with the fabric of reality because i
learned that
the world could make sense someone put
into words
the idea that everything could
eventually make sense and that
academics intellectuals public figures
who relished in trying to confuse
with jargon or to try and impress one
with their
superior knowledge and who would tell
you that there's no point thinking about
certain things because
that's just a mystery we'll never solve
here's david deutsch in the fabric of
reality
telling you that this is false
that in fact the world can make sense
and it's more beautiful in the fact that
it can make sense
people like carl sagan had made these
noises richard feynman had made these
noises of course as well
that the vision that you get of reality
once you understand it can be
comprehensible
it's so much better than
simply falling back into the wonder and
mystery of it all without being
concerned about what the answers are
you should have both or and wonder at
the majesty of reality
and the fact we can understand it
we people can understand it we are part
of that grand vision because
we're uniquely as far as we know in the
universe
can understand parts of that reality
and eventually everything that can be
understood so the fabric of reality
taught me this
in particular the first thing it taught
me was that quantum theory was
perfectly comprehensible not in all
parts there are mysteries there there
are open questions but
the parts we do understand can be
understood we don't have to fall back
onto nonsense we don't have to jump to
supernatural explanations
in any area by the way anytime there's
an open question
we do not jump to a supernatural
explanation that's not required
now after the fabric of reality it was a
a long time until i was so impressed by
a book
again not quite equal to the fabric of
reality
but it took a while and i was reading
widely
and i kind of thought i understood the
world view in the fabric of reality but
as it turned out i didn't really and
there's
in a sense an objective measure of this
for me in my own mind
because as i say in my other series that
i've
just been commenced doing on the fabric
of reality
although i'd read that book multiple
times and i'd even discussed it online
and i even discussed it online
to a limited extent with david deutch
himself i don't think i truly
got it in all respects i mean most
importantly i did indeed understand
i thought the science but i didn't
really take on board
the popularian epistemology at least i
might have understood it academically
at one level but i wasn't living it
i wasn't taking it on board as being
part of
genuinely my worldview because
i didn't really notice when people were
anti-popular when intellectuals
philosophers people out there in the
world
were saying things that were just
antithetical
to the work of kyle popper and to david
deutsch
i i noticed the errors some of the time
but not
all of the time so one of one of the
first books that kind of
did impress me after the fabric of
reality was in 2004
sam harris published his first book the
end of faith
and that was the beginning of a whole
series of books
published on the same theme that were
anti-religious there was
books by richard dawkins by christopher
hitchens by
daniel dennett and i read all of these i
bought all these i just ate them up
voraciously
in the case of sam i i loved his style
of writing
it was lyrical it was metaphorical it
was
poetic i just liked that style of prose
the clarity of it and
i already was on board with so much of
what he said
in terms of the anti-superstitious stuff
the anti-faith stuff it certainly was
the most
withering and clear attack against
standard organized religion and faith
that i'd ever read until that point and
and listening to sam speak
in those in those early years of his
fame
was refreshing because there were few
people
out there that i was aware of in the
media who could speak with such clarity
and just cut through the nonsense but i
mentioned this because
although i was reading all of these guys
harris
dawkins hitchens dennett you know
and and others as well what i didn't
notice
was all of the errors throughout
these works it seemed to me that if
a sentence was written clearly and made
sense
that was enough and it didn't
jump out at me so much of this
writing so much of this work that people
had done
the anti-religious stuff which touched
on the
intersection or the clash between
the religious and the scientific
worldviews that i didn't
notice the poverty of epistemology
and an understanding of science there
and this the philosophy of science
and the philosophy of mathematics and
just the general way in which we view
people
now and the that's there in the fabric
of reality to a large extent
i didn't notice i didn't notice because
although i'd read the fabric of reality
multiple times and i was having online
discussions about it
and i understood it at a level it
hadn't really formed part of the
meme plex so to speak that was in my
mind my
literal way of seeing everything
analyzing everything in particular
people's writing and people's speech so
i i was
quite readily persuaded to a large
extent
by clarity of writing clarity of writing
that
criticized nonsense like superstition
and i thought well if they're
criticizing superstition well then
they're correct in the way that they do
it
and i was wrong about that it's right to
criticize superstition
and religion but there are ways of doing
it that are better and worse
the end of faith was published in 2004
and that's
interesting because it's exactly mid way
between the publication date of the
fabric of reality
and the beginning of infinity and the
reason i mentioned that is because of
this
psychological phenomena of learning that
i want to speak about
and that is as i say my worldview
changed when i read the fabric of
reality i thought i understood science
far more deeply
and academically i thought i understood
the epistemology to some extent
if you if you for example if you pressed
me to
make a study of a particular passage of
text
and to say what was wrong with it in
light of poppa's philosophy i probably
could have done it
with some effort with some effort but it
wouldn't have been second nature to me
it was only after the beginning of
infinity possibly for the first time i
don't want to talk myself up maybe it
took
a second read and and some discussions
but whatever
soon after reading the beginning of
infinity things became
what i can only describe as effortless
i was without effort
able to read a text
and almost immediately the errors in
epistemology the errors in thinking
the pessimism the prophecy the poverty
of content was
immediately revealed to me what was what
was there in my mind
in an academic sense after reading the
fabric of reality
became my lived experience as people say
after reading the beginning infinity
i didn't simply remember the facts that
were in the fabric of reality i
understood and in particular i
understood what epistemology was
and that became so obvious to me
psychologically
because prior to the beginning of
infinity if i had heard a person
everyone else said was smart saying
something
smart erudite insightful i'd typically
nod along
and in some sense be transfixed by the
clarity of their language
and i'd think to myself well they're
making sense
that's enough but after the beginning of
infinity
so much more often i began thinking
when people were speaking publicly
writing
beautifully clear articles i would think
to myself well that
makes sense but making sense is not
enough
they're making errors they're making
serious errors errors that
kind of like dominoes cause their entire
argument to collapse
you can make perfect sense and be
completely wrong
and you can make perfect sense and reach
the correct conclusions by
an invalid argument because you began in
the wrong place
the premises were wrong the premises
were wrong
but you followed the rules of inference
and you reached a conclusion
which is the correct conclusion by an
invalid method
because which is the correct conclusion
which can happen
by chance it happens by chance or if not
by chance it's because
people know what the correct conclusion
is but have worked backwards
using a false epistemology by which they
can prove just about anything including
the
true conclusion by a bad method so i
i began to think that i understood why
smart people thought
what they thought and then i understood
why they were wrong
so if i take again it's a book that i
recommend to people
and i think it's written beautifully but
and and as you know one of my maxims in
life is one of the
greatest things you can do for any work
and any idea is to criticize it so let's
take
the end of faith sam harris's first book
i understood why
the central thesis made sense and why
you would reach those conclusions
and why those conclusions were in fact
correct
some of the time but the argument was
wrong
for example why be an atheist now sam
doesn't use the word atheism or atheist
i think throughout the book and he's
made this point
quite a few times but on this world view
of
harris dawkins hitchens dennis and on
almost everyone's worldview
the standard intellectual take is
that you're an atheist because there's
no evidence
for god there's no evidence for god
so one should not believe in god
and at the time when i heard these
things over and again
i thought it was completely a reasonable
position to hold
that is why one
is forced into atheism why one doesn't
believe theism but it's wrong
there's no evidence for anything
and the fact is that i know forget
belief
i know there is no god now why
well because no explanation requires me
to invoke the existence of god
i'm in the same place as laplace talking
to napoleon bonaparte who
when laplace explained i think it was
projectile motion to
napoleon napoleon said these equations
are lovely but where is god
and laplace apparently said
well sire i have no need of that
hypothesis
and this has been true ever since i've
kind of come to the realization one does
not need to
invoke that god hypothesis to explain
anything
okay there are open questions certainly
but we do not need to leap
to god is the explanation so when and
again when i say i know that god does
not exist it does not mean i am
certain god does not exist and you can
see my blog post for this but i raised
this because this is
again another thing that ricky gervais
seems to insist on that we
must be agnostic on almost all questions
because in his mind
and i think this is just common
knowledge out there
among intellectuals of a certain stripe
um
that no means be certain of that you
can't actually say i know that
unless you're 100 sure which is a
standard no one can reach
and so ricky rejects saying that he
knows that god does not exist
instead he instead he just says i he
doesn't believe it of course in my
purporian worldview i don't have beliefs
either
i just have knowledge and i act on the
knowledge or i don't act on the
knowledge
but also now the end of faith again i
recommend a book
it's a nice book it's a withering attack
on religion
but now after the beginning of infinity
i'm not personally particularly
anti-religious the anti-religious
arguments now strike me
as like level big brain you know these
memes this big brain galaxy brain thing
well the anti-religious stuff is like
big brain rather than being caught in
religion you then just reject it all
but i think the galaxy brain take is
more like although
superstitions and parts about angels and
gods and miracles are false there's a
heck of a lot to preserve
with religion and there's reasons for
this in much the same way there's a
heck of a lot to preserve in
civilization
broadly and that that thing that's worth
preserving
is a certain kind of tradition and
although i hesitate to use the word
a certain kind of collectivism which is
not a collectivism
of a political kind or a coercive kind
but it might be something where i would
distance myself from
iron rand type objectivism where i think
that
is highly highly anti-religious and to
some extent
highly anti-tradition as well but
i'm i'm against force and the extraction
of wealth and
coercion all that kind of stuff what i
what i am
talking about here in
endorsing tradition endorsing religion
the galaxy brain view of these things
which is a real step beyond
traditional skeptical philosophy and
even certain
types of modern skeptical philosophy
is i'm talking about the value of having
traditions
and cultures of organizing societies and
communities
which themselves contain inexplicit
knowledge about how to keep dynamic
societies
from falling into staticity
let me just say that sentence again
i'm talking about the value of having
traditions and cultures
of organizing societies and communities
which contain inexplicit knowledge about
how to
keep dynamic societies from falling into
staticity
it's a rather verbose sentence in some
ways and i think it's
constructed particularly well but i just
i just
say it and and put it on the screen
there to illustrate something
i think that that if you understand
english you can read that sentence and
you can say okay it makes
sense but if you are
knowledgeable about the beginning of
infinity worldview deeply knowledgeable
you will understand that sentence at a
very different level
to what anyone no matter how clever they
are
how erudite they seem how well qualified
they are you'll understand it in a way
that is very different to everyone else
because notice how dense it is
how dense with knowledge that sentence
is how much background one needs
in the entire world view of the
beginning of infinity
to get it i mean really get it not just
superficially be able to read the words
and guess
one understands what is intended notice
if i wanted to explain that sentence in
the beginning of infinity terms
i would have to explain whole aspects
of the worldview for hours on
end just to explain a single sentence
for someone who'd never read the book
before
inexplicit knowledge what is that
well i'd have to begin with a papillion
view of what
knowledge was in the first place so
there's a whole hour of conversation
then the inexplicit part not merely
implicit
inexplicit then moving on to
dynamic societies that would require an
explanation about
well explanations and progress and memes
memes goodness that there's another
whole
episode if i was going to unpack this
and memes would take us into cultures
cultures takes us into
static societies and anti-rational memes
and then how certain traditions
specifically traditions of criticism
allow for open-ended progress
look already in explaining what i would
need to explain
to explain that sentence i've gone on
for ages
and this is what i mean about the
beginning of infinity
once you take it on board some people
have said recently i've observed that
naval has remarked more than once that
the beginning of infinity
is not an easy book to read and others
have said that that observation is a
disservice to the book
but naval is absolutely right it's not
easy but that shouldn't put anyone off
that's not a criticism
and that shouldn't frighten anyone away
that's what it means for a book to have
value if it was easy
everyone would already understand what's
in there anyway there'd be no point
reading it
interesting books are sometimes hard to
read the lord of the rings is hard to
read but i love it i read it every
couple of years because
it's just a great entertaining book and
there's a sense in which the beginning
of infinity can be read
because it's entertaining over and again
but it's
far far deeper than something like lord
of the rings there are
many more levels of course but it's not
easy
a single sentence like the one that i
just tried to unpack
or began to unpack to explain to unpack
how i would unpack it
illustrates why this podcast series
is has been important to me because as i
said in that very first episode
i'm trying to clarify in my own mind
what this is all about
fun things are not necessarily easy
it's what makes them fun is the
challenge and in in reading the
beginning of infinity for the first
time or maybe the second time to use a
biblical passage
the scales fell from my eyes and i saw
properly
properly saw what was there in the
fabric of reality
the whole time and what's there in
papa's work to a large extent the whole
time
and it was then it was then that my my
actual perceptions of the world my
the qualia my subjective experience of
the world did indeed change
because where before i could appreciate
excellent writing just for its own sake
now so much of it seemed
much more worse than before and i'm not
here referring
mainly to the work of sam harris it's
much much
broader than this i mean almost every
other book on my shelf every other
non-fiction book on my shelf when i
flicked through it became a confusing
trial of the mind i would just spot
error
after error and it happens to this day
it's not to say that i can't learn
from certain books or that books are
ruined at all for me
for example more than once i've
recommended uh a fortunate universe
life in a finely tuned cosmos by
astronomers
barnes and lewis it's a good book
i can learn from it and i recommend it
to people it's written very well it's
it's funny in places
but it's just to say that now i notice
glaring errors in epistemology all the
time
and when the claims about science
the the the ostensib topic of the book
the main subject matter of the book
i can recognize when those claims are
dubious
no matter how certain the authors claim
to be
in short i no longer feel no matter how
qualified
an expert happens to be i don't think
they're necessarily better than me
even in those areas where they claim
expertise
i've ceased to be intimidated by
and that's a very good thing i'm very
anti-authority now
and this is the sense in which it's
self-help i'm
error correcting constantly now double
thinking what
the expert opinion is no matter how
confident they seem to be
because i'm comfortable asking
rather than trusting i think it's a
great virtue to
ask and ask and ask until you understand
rather than just
assuming that by virtue of the fact
someone is qualified in a particular
area
that they will know better than you they
may but you better have a good
explanation
as to why they should know better than
you on that particular claim they're
making
when when i was at uni studying
philosophy and physics at the
undergraduate level especially i was
somewhat in
awe of the professors or even just the
phd students i thought they must have
been so deeply knowledgeable and clever
i almost thought their minds must
operate in a different way
and when it came to famous public
intellectuals forget it i thought they
must have been on a different plane
altogether
but i was wrong to think all that
they're all just
people i never understood for example
why the philosophy of professors who
taught me back then
and who mentioned papa during lectures
and tutorials once or twice
didn't big him up more why they didn't
make a bigger deal about him because i
knew that david deutsch was in the
fabric of reality for example
but now i know i didn't know then but i
know now and i can say without
any concern they didn't understand him
experts in poppa at university
aren't actually experts by and large i
know what this is like now i
read papa soon after i read the fabric
of reality
and it's the knowledge was there i could
regurgitate it
not entirely because i hadn't really
taken it on board and if i had gotten
into a debate with someone about the
content of kyle
popper's work i guess i would have come
up short
because you need a proper guide and the
beginning of infinity was
my proper guide now i don't i can't
fully explain why i didn't get it
there in the fabric of reality it's
probably to do with the fact you
sometimes need the lesson more than once
and you need to talk about these things
and really
think them through but the fact is that
the beginning of infinity did indeed
reveal
karl popper's epistemology to me it took
david deutch to do that
and then i could go back and properly
appreciate papa in a new light
far more deeply and then realize those
others who tried explaining his
worldview
typically got it all wrong totally wrong
they treated poppa just like another
purely academic philosopher just another
set of readings alongside
can't and descartes and so on but it's
not it's a it's
a way of thinking now this is not to say
i should add that i don't recommend
studying philosophy at uni
i i can recommend it if you want but i
don't think that their
advertising material in this day and age
is at all true when i go looking at
university courses on philosophy they
say that it will help you think better
i think it'll help you if you're not
prepared if you're not prepared with a
certain amount of intellectual
self-defense
it may cause you to think worse far
worse philosophy at uni
is like history and literature more than
anything else
you read the texts you study the texts
you argue about the texts
you won't really improve your thinking
you won't become
by any stretch of the imagination a
critical thinker
at least at the universities that i've
looked at maybe there are some
unicorn universities out there who do a
really good job at this mainly if you're
not prepared you'll become indoctrinated
into inductivism
justificationism and so on and so forth
all of the bad ideas of today
i now recognize for example that my own
father who never went to university
none of my family did my extended family
my grandparents
to this day i'm the only one for
generations to have gone to university
and it's not a source of pride to me
that i went to university but it is a
source of pride to me that
the rest of my family didn't because
their method of thinking
was so much superior and remains so much
superior to
many mainstream academics that that i've
encountered
throughout my life my father especially
is better than a better thinker than
the philosophy professors who taught me
my father was a
an aircraft engineer and he understood
what it
took for things to work and how to
identify
garbage when it was being presented to
him but academic philosophers so often
can't do this they don't understand the
practical consequences of
certain kinds of reasoning but again
that too took
reading the beginning of infinity to
figure out common sense
realism is after all what papa refined
and made explicit most
people are common sense realism the
galaxy brain is common sense realism
it's only the the big brain take that is
anti this and anti that with their
bayesianism and their evidence for and
their justified beliefs
that's all confusing abstract style
thinking disconnected from
the actual practice of solving problems
now the only the only difference really
between
i should say between man on the street
style thinking
and populion style epistemology is the
popularian style epistemology
has the vocabulary to explain how
thinking works and how progress is made
and how problems are solved
that's all it does it makes explicit
these things that already work out there
in the world
and people don't need to understand how
it works
broadly speaking i've compared this
before to the difference between
an airline pilot and an aircraft
engineer
the aircraft engineer better know how
the engines work
the pilot doesn't really need to maybe
they have some basic ideas but they can
have a whole bunch of misconceptions as
well
all they need to do is to fly the
aircraft from point a to point b
without ever really worrying about the
details about what's going on with the
computer systems with the avionics with
the
the engines and so on and so forth they
have a limited understanding of those
things
this is the difference between someone
who really understands popularity
epistemology
that's like the engineer and the person
who just gets on with making progress
that's the pilot there are other people
out there
call them call them bayesian engineers
who all they do they never actually work
on engines at all they never actually
are able to figure out how the whole
machine keeps on going
they're over there at the side with
something that they call an engine
but in fact it's just a pile of sticks
and they're explaining how this pile of
sticks if only
you could put them together into a
particular way would indeed be an engine
but they never go about actually
creating an engine
whereas what a popeyrian does is
actually explain
the already existing engine and how it
works
and why it functions and if something
starts to go wrong they can identify
why the progress stops why there is a
problem in science
here's the error let's correct the error
that's what a papillion epistemologist
does they're more like the engineer
an actual engineer working on real
engines rather than imaginary ones
which is what various other kinds of
epistemology do
they're abstractly being concerned about
possible engines okay that is a very
tortured analogy i apologize for that
whatever the case
popper and deutsch make explicit the
ways in which people
really do think really do learn really
do create knowledge
how it all works how civilization is
built
as naval tweeted recently civilization
is not built by pessimists and in my
last episode i remarked about the unholy
trinity
of pessimism and prophecy and how it's
all fed
by this false epistemology so if you
want to study philosophy
especially at philosophy at university
or anything at all
i think you do need intellectual
self-defense against the dark arts of
the intelligentsia
that rules there now i think a lot of
people have little crumbs of the story i
mean there are people who rightly oppose
marxism in universities and post-modern
type thinking
and all the double speak that goes on
there now but again
if you want the full suite of armor and
the shield and the laser sword then you
want
the beginning of infinity and if of
course if you if you read
the fabric of reality as well and the
work of papa and
well other things recommended at the
beginning of infinity then you'll be
like a fully
kitted out intellectual jedi master of a
kind
and you'll be able to sit in on
philosophy seminars debates discussions
and learn without fear of ever being
indoctrinated
and be able to quickly identify errors
in thinking
now that has been one of the longest
preambles to any of my episodes but it's
only fitting
as this is the last episode on the
beginning of infinity
and as well i don't have much left to
read
and in this section that i am going to
read this this final section
there is a vast list of deep
questions which of course illustrate the
beginning of infinity they're profound
mysteries
and to a large extent they're going to
leave your head spinning and i want to
unpack
some of them i'll have no answers but i
do want to discuss some of them
so let's go back to the book and david
writes
the economist robin hansen has suggested
that there have been several
singularities in the history of our
species
such as the agricultural revolution and
the industrial revolution
arguably even the early enlightenment
was a singularity by that definition
who could have predicted that someone
who lived through the english civil war
a bloody struggle of religious fanatics
versus an absolute monarch
and through the victory of the religious
fanatics in 1651
might also live through the peaceful
birth of a society
that saw liberation and reason as its
principal characteristics
the royal society for instance was
founded in 1660
a development that would hardly have
been conceivable
a generation earlier roy porter marks
1688 as the beginning of the english
enlightenment
that is the date of the glorious
revolution
the beginning of predominantly
constitutional government
along with many other rational reforms
which were
part of that deeper and astonishingly
rapid shift in the prevailing world view
pausing there just my reflection on this
roy porter
is a historian that i learned about from
david deutsch
from this book and i think david tweeted
once that was
roy porter who explained that there were
two distinct
kinds of enlightenment one of which was
the english enlightenment and so i went
and investigated this morning it really
inspired me to read
the work of roy porter and to listen to
some of his lectures
and in one of those lectures indeed
about uh one of his books
there's a video of him and this is on
youtube by the way
his thesis is that there were two things
called the enlightenment
of a very distinct kind and indeed they
were
opposite in many ways they were they
were absolutely opposed
to one another there was the english
enlightenment and by english by the way
he
he means british because certainly
scotsman like adam smith and david hume
were involved
but but it was called the english and
alliance called it the english
enlightenment
because the other thing that was all
together separate was the european
enlightenment the enlightenment that was
going on the continent of europe
france and germany in particular and
here we really get into
the philosophy wars and i don't use that
word lightly
because it really did the ideas there
set the scene for war later on i mean
there are a lot of reasons and a lot of
ways in which we could explain
the missteps in europe especially
over the recent decades relatively
recent decades
and one of the impulses are of course
primary among them are the ideas that
people have ideas are
levers that push people's behaviors
and importantly philosophical ideas
motivate political ones which motivate
politicians
which then cause militaries to do what
they do so this is not mere abstract
arguing it's not merely of abstract
interests
this has absolutely real world
consequences
and there is a reason why the english
tradition
the british tradition of governance
and just tradition more broadly resists
tyranny and violence
and this is controversial to say but
i'll just say it
there is a reason why the french
revolution happened in france why the
violence
there was so great and why germany has
had the political problems
that it has had and why spain has well
through to today
it is no accident the eu exists in
europe
and many people of course think that an
organization
like the eu exists to benefit the region
and the world they say it exists in part
to keep the peace but why does the
peace need to be kept on the continent
of europe in the first place
why is europe a special problem
is there an underlying reason for the
conflict that seems to
degenerate into violence there violence
which we should be
eager to keep in mind britain has stood
against
numerous times these are not accidents
but in these matters i must say i'm a
complete amateur and i recommend the
work of
roy porter on this and also daniel
hannon uh his his book
inventing freedom but but my take my
take away from roy porter among
others on this is that it's it really is
people like emmanuel khan
the german philosopher versus people
like
adam smith the philosopher credited with
the beginnings of capitalism
lock on freedom hume on reason
these guys smith lock hume against can't
and yet they're all studied in
philosophy departments around the world
and universities
as if well they're all just different
aspects of the same kind of
enlightenment and they're not
they're absolutely not kant is standing
against
those guys he's standing against
capitalism and freedom and reason
smith and locke and hume what was kant
about
well among many things and i don't want
to get into a long
exploration of the ideas the poverty of
ideas of emanuel khan's
but he had a critique of reason he said
here i have a critique of pure reason
i'm not going to defend kant i will just
say he was about
how people cannot trust themselves or
their own minds
and as a consequence require strong
leadership
he argues against individuals and to
some extent like plato
for tyrants or for tyranny something
like plato's philosopher kings
he thinks that we should should
subjugate ourselves can't thinks this
we're morally obliged for example to
obey every law of a government
he exalts government to the place of a
god
and this is the european tradition of
their view
between the individual and the
government and it infects now
aspects of american politics australian
politics
western politics broadly there is this
battle
there is this battle between the british
enlightenment tradition
of freedom and the individual and of
pursuing wealth and the more european
style
of tyranny authoritarianism and
subjugating the individual before the
state
the english tradition to be fair does
not devalue government
it has a place for government it just
doesn't offer it up as a substitute
either for god
or the individual mind the whole point
of the tradition of the british
political culture
is that government is there to preserve
the rights of the individual
now of course that ideal is one that
all political parties over time through
the british tradition in whatever
country
they fail to live up to this ideal again
and again they fail to live up to it
but at least it's there as an ideal as
an aspiration
the ideology underlying the alternative
democratic systems is to subjugate
oneself to the authority of the
government
it's a stark difference and so this is a
very
interesting area of the history of
philosophy and of philosophy
but i think more work can be done on
following the work of roy porter that
even today our ideological conflicts can
be traced
back to the antecedent centuries ago
where people were debating the
relationship between
the individual and the state at the role
of reason in the world and
could people individuals come to
create knowledge such that they could be
to use modern parlance
error correctors of their own lives
rather than relying upon
some authority to do it for them to sit
back
inert and passive and hope that the man
on the television screen
wearing the tie with the title
will tell you what to do next rather
than you reasoning it through yourself
it's the british tradition versus the
european tradition
and it seems very parochial but of
course these things have universal
application
into every other continent of the world
and every other people and civilization
of the world as well
there's a choice to be made back to the
book
david writes also the time beyond which
scientific prediction has no access
is different for different phenomena for
each phenomena
it is the moment at which the creation
of new knowledge may begin to make a
significant difference
to what one is trying to predict let me
just repeat that because um this
explains
the distinction between prediction and
prophecy
in a very clear way
david said the time beyond which
scientific prediction has no access
is different for different phenomena for
each phenomena
it is the moment which at the creation
of new knowledge
may begin to make a significant
difference to what one is trying to
predict
in other words a prophecy
is a guess about the future
where new knowledge creation
is going to have an effect on that
phenomena
but a prediction i usually like to say
it's a derivation from
a scientific theory a logical derivation
from a scientific theory which is true
but it's not the full story
because from a good scientific theory
i can make the prediction and this is
the example that david
has used i've used i can make the
scientific prediction from good
astrophysical
principles laws laws of physics
every astronomer has done this every
astronomer has ever had a podium
somewhere has talked about this
that in approximately five billion years
something like that
this sun will expand into a red giant
and will engulf the earth
or at least extinguish life on the earth
by boiling the ocean something like that
that's a prediction apparently but not
really
not according to this because we don't
know what
humans of the very distant future will
do
they might save the earth if only to
preserve it like a museum piece
as i think david has said in various
places
so that's not a real prediction it's a
prophecy about what people will do
or what it will be possible to do now on
the other hand if i make a prediction
that tomorrow the sun will continue to
shine
given the laws of physics today that's a
prediction because
there is no sign whatsoever that
knowledge is going to be created in the
next 24 hours that is going to allow us
to
affect the sun in some way so there's
your distinction
back to the book david writes since our
estimates of that
two are subject to the same kind of
horizon
we should really understand all our
predictions as implicitly including the
proviso
unless the creation of new knowledge
intervenes yes so i like that so
it's got that provider there's a lot of
provisos here
when we speak using
papyrian style language using the
language of the beginning of infinity
you know when i say i know something
it comes with the proviso that
provisionally
things could change i could be wrong
about this it doesn't mean i'm certainly
absolutely confident that it must remain
the same forever that it's inerrant
okay there are all these kinds of
provisos
i i expect things will continue to get
better because i expect
that people continue to produce
knowledge and solve problems
with the proviso that we don't end up
falling into an ideological hole
where people decide that it's better for
us to
stop creating any kind of pollution and
to
ensure that the state has complete
control over the
means of production and that kind of
thing okay so with those provisos with
the proviso that
we continue to exploit resources
and use the best of our enlightenment
traditions and ideas
in order to fuel knowledge creation
back to the book david writes some
explanations do have reach into the
distant future
far beyond the horizons that make most
other things unpredictable
one of them is that fact itself another
is the infinite potential of explanatory
knowledge
the subject of this book okay so just
pausing there
so some things do reach off into the
infinite future
namely how knowledge is constructed the
infinite potential of explanatory
knowledge the fact that
explanatory knowledge will will enable
the
transformation of physical reality
around us
because of what we choose to do that
will always be the case
nothing about explanatory knowledge can
change that unless
you know including the fact that we
could choose to
do ridiculous things that cause us to go
extinct in the way of the dinosaur
the potential was always still there the
potential
for explanatory knowledge to
radically transform the universe the
cosmos
let's keep going david writes to attempt
to predict anything beyond the relevant
horizon is futile
it is prophecy but wondering what is
beyond it is not
when wandering leads to conjecture that
constitutes speculation
which is not irrational either in fact
it is vital every one of those deeply
unforeseeable new ideas that make the
future unpredictable
will begin as a speculation and every
speculation begins as a problem
problems in regard to the future can
reach beyond the horizon of prediction
too
and problems have solutions in regard to
understanding the physical world
we are in much the same position as a
roster themes was
in regard to the earth he could measure
it remarkably accurately and he knew a
great deal about certain aspects of it
immensely more than his ancestors had
known only a few centuries before
he must have known about such things as
seasons
in regions of the earth about which he
had no evidence
but he also knew that most of what was
out there was far beyond his theoretical
knowledge as well as his physical reach
we cannot yet measure the universe as
accurately as the roster things measured
the earth
and we too know how ignorant we are for
instance
we know from universality that
artificial intelligence
is attainable by writing computer
programs but we have no idea how to
write
or evolve the right one we do not know
what qualia
are or how creativity works despite
having working examples
of qualia and creativity inside all of
us we learned the genetic code decades
ago but we have no idea why it has the
reach it has
we know that both of the deepest
prevailing theories in physics
must be false we know that people are of
fundamental significance but we do not
know
whether we are among those people we may
fail or give up
and intelligences originating elsewhere
in the universe may be
the beginning of infinity and so on for
all the problems i have mentioned
and many more wheeler once imagined
writing out all the equations that might
be the ultimate laws of physics on
sheets of paper
all over the floor quote from wheeler
stand up look back on all those
equations some perhaps more hopeful than
others
raise one's finger commandingly and give
the order
fly not one of those equations will put
on wings
take off or fly yet the universe flies
end quote from meisner thorne and
wheeler in their book gravitation 1973.
we do not know why it flies what is the
difference between laws that are
instantiated in physical reality and
those that are not
pause down my reflection so this idea of
flies well
it presumes i think to some extent that
laws can exist independently
of a physical reality
i don't know what that would mean that
you could have physical laws
alternative physical laws out there in
abstract space
now if they do exist out there in
abstract space they
you know in a sense one might argue that
they would give rise to
an alternate physical reality which we
don't have access to
i don't know but certainly it might be a
mystery as to
why this set of physical laws exists at
all in the first place
governing this particular universe
so maybe there are physical laws
extension in physical reality namely
these ones here
and no others but we don't know the
answer to that yet either way it's a
mystery if all possible physical laws
are instantiated out there in the
universe somewhere
why if they're not why
interesting question here are some more
questions
david goes on to say quote what is the
difference between a computer simulation
of a person which must be a person
because of universality and a recording
of that simulation
which cannot be a person end quote
so we've got the possibility of a person
which is what we are
if we took the program that's running on
our brains and stuck it into a computer
then that would be a person as well
because it would be thinking it would be
processing information
that's what we're doing it would be
constructing knowledge because it would
have the relevant
program the program which constructs
knowledge in a computer i'm doing this
action because i'm pointing at my own
laptop presumably you could
stick it into a laptop i i would also
say there's a moral hazard here because
who knows what the quality would be it
could be
terrible suffering so don't do it yet
until we know
we know we're near that anyway by the
way
but but but if you could if you could
simulate a person
but then you recorded that and you
played the recording
is the recording not a person presumably
not so what's going on
this is the distinction between whether
or not something has
a subjective content qualia
consciousness and something that does
not
david goes on to ask quote when there
are two identical simulations underway
are there two sets of qualia or one
double the moral value or not
our world which is so much larger more
unified more intricate and more
beautiful than that of us
roster things and which we understand
and control to an extent that would have
seemed
god-like to him is nevertheless just as
mysterious yet open to us now as it was
to him then
we have lit only a few candles here and
there
we can cower in their parochial light
until something beyond our
kin snuffs us out or we can resist
we already see that we do not live in a
senseless world
the laws of physics make sense the world
is explicable there are higher levels of
emergence and higher levels of
explanation
profound abstractions in mathematics
morality
and aesthetics are accessible to us
ideas of tremendous reach are possible
but there is also plenty in the world
that does not and will not make sense
until we ourselves work out how to
rectify it
death does not make sense stagnation
does not make sense
a bubble of sense within an endless
senselessness
does not make sense whether the world
ultimately makes sense will depend on
how people
the likes of us choose to think and act
pausing their
my reflection so as i've said many times
before this is a
great rebuttal response refutation
against other public intellectuals of
our time
prominent among them richard dawkins
and neil degrasse tyson biologist and
the astronomer
coming at this from two different
directions
richard dawkins says we've evolved in
middle world so our brains have evolved
such that we can only understand the
things that are of approximately
our size and our speed and so on so it
is no mystery
why we can't understand the universe as
a whole it's too big we didn't evolve
for that or quantum theory it's too
small we didn't evolve for that
he doesn't understand what universality
is the universality of the mind
we can model within our minds anything
it doesn't matter what the size of the
thing is that is a parochial
misconception
about what a human
person's mind is we're not like all
those other creatures
and neil degrasse tyson says well maybe
the ultimate laws of physics
are just so complicated will never come
to understand them
again this is a misunderstanding
computational universality might be
falsified in some way shape or form
but until then we've got nowhere else to
leap to the best understanding that we
have
is that our minds contain within them
universal computers
or can emulate certainly and emulate
universal computers our brains
are universal our minds are universal we
can therefore
simulate phenomena that exist out there
to any degree of fidelity that we like
we just have to keep learning more and
more and more so he doesn't understand
universality either the universality of
the laws in physics and the relationship
between
our minds and the structures that are
out there this concept of
self-similarity that i've talked about
before either
david deutsch has this positive world
view
that things make sense and that that's
not going to
end for the last time
in terms of this book i'm reading others
right now of course so
go to the physics of canon can't go to
the fabric of reality
you can hear me say this phrase again
but for the last time
with the beginning of infinity i'll say
and david writes quote many people have
an aversion to infinity of various kinds
but there are some things that we do not
have a choice about
there is only one way of thinking that
is capable of making progress
or surviving in the long run and that is
the way of seeking
good explanations through creativity and
criticism
what lies ahead of us is in any case
infinity
all we can choose is whether it is an
infinity of ignorance
or of knowledge wrong or right
death or life
we're only in chapter one and already
there are these
phenomenal advances in philosophy
phenomenal advances in
epistemology excellent explanations of
what our best explanations of
epistemology and philosophy
are all illustrated with some
excellent science um that'll do me for
now that's um
that's quite a bit of reading uh and
maybe
uh tomorrow i'll i'll try and get into
chapter two we'll see how we go
[Music]
you